---
title: "Specification of vulval precursor cells and cell fusion control in C. elegans"
aliases:
- /node/178
taxon: 
- C. elegans
process: 
- Differentiation
submitter: Claudine (Nathan Weinstein)
supporting_paper: "177"
files: 
- vpcwt23h.ginml
file_descriptions: 
- Model GINsim file (N. Weinstein and L. Mendoza, Frontiers in Genetics 2013)
---


The vulva of _Caenorhabditis elegans_ has been long used as an experimental
model of cell differentiation and organogenesis. While it is known that the
signaling cascades of Wnt, Ras/MAPK, and NOTCH interact to form a molecular
network, there is no consensus regarding its precise topology and dynamical
properties. We inferred the molecular network, and developed a multivalued
synchronous discrete dynamic model to study its behavior. The model reproduces
the patterns of activation reported for the following types of cell: vulval
precursor, first fate, second fate, second fate with reversed polarity, third
fate, and fusion fate. We simulated the fusion of cells, the determination of
the first, second, and third fates, as well as the transition from the second
to the first fate. We also used the model to simulate all possible single
loss- and gain-of-function mutants, as well as some relevant double and triple
mutants. Importantly, we associated most of these simulated mutants to
multivulva, vulvaless, egg-laying defective, or defective polarity phenotypes.
The model shows that it is necessary for RAL-1 to activate NOTCH signaling,
since the repression of LIN-45 by RAL-1 would not suffice for a proper second
fate determination in an environment lacking DSL ligands. We also found that
the model requires the complex formed by LAG-1, LIN-12, and SEL-8 to inhibit
the transcription of _eff-1_ in second fate cells. Our model is the largest
reconstruction to date of the molecular network controlling the specification
of vulval precursor cells and cell fusion control in C. elegans. According to
our model, the process of fate determination in the vulval precursor cells is
reversible, at least until either the cells fuse with the ventral hypoderm or
divide, and therefore the cell fates must be maintained by the presence of
extracellular signals.


